Okay, the tape is rolling.
Okay, first of all, could you tell me if you, as a youngster, did you come from the fan
structure in science fiction?
No, my experience with science fiction was very solitary for most of my period of growing
up.
I discovered the area of the fantastic.
I think I can trace back to when I was eight or nine years old, when I found some old Edgar
Riceboro's novels in my grandmother's back closet.
And one by one read them and became entranced by it.
That was followed by a period during the 30s when the pulp adventure magazines were at
their height.
And my father and his brothers, my uncles, would buy these 10 cent magazines and bring
them home and I would read them.
Mostly they seemed to prefer the pulp hero magazines like Doc Savage and Operator Number
Five and The Spider and The Shadow and magazines of this kind, which I, you know, G8 is battle
aces.
But eventually I discovered a second hand magazine store in Kansas City where I was
born and grew up.
And when I finished reading the magazines, I'd take them down to this magazine store
and trade them for science fiction magazines, which I then devoured.
So I grew up not really knowing any other science fiction readers.
My brother, older brother, read a little, but not with the enthusiasm that I did.
So my first contact with other readers, much less other writers, was after I'd been writing
for four years.
I was aware that there was this fan structure because in some of the magazines like Starling
Stories and Throwing Wonder Stories, and even in A Sounding, there would be letter columns
with the names of people.
Gradually I began to recognize a few of them and I realized that there were other readers.
But it wasn't until I attended the World Science Fiction Convention of 1952, which was held
in Chicago, and I was urged to go by the company I worked for at that time, a paperback
publishing house for whom I was supposed to be their science fiction expert, and they
suggested that they'd pay my way if I went to the somewhat old 60, 80 miles down from
the scene of the consulate in Chicago and attend the convention to make context.
And that was my first experience with really meeting other readers and other writers and
agents and editors in the whole paraphernalia of the science fiction world.
Okay, good.
Can you recall the circumstances?
I believe it was in 1949 of your first published story.
Yes, I was, had read science fiction, as I said, from all about the age of eight or nine,
and read it seriously for a while during the middle thirties.
And at the age of about fifteen or sixteen, I had written some science fiction stories,
though with no particular skill.
And I usually, like most beginning writers, didn't even finish most of them.
I can only remember one that I finished.
But then the college came along and the war came along, and I got involved in both of
them.
And it wasn't until after I'd come back from service and gotten my bachelor's degree and
had actually had about a year of graduate study that I decided to try full-time writing.
I had been interested in theater playwriting, but finally decided I didn't want to get a
degree in that in the speech and theater area.
But I was fascinated by the notion of radio writing.
So I returned from Northwestern University to Kansas City with the notion of writing
a series of half-hour radio dramas based on Kansas City history and getting some local
radio station to produce them.
And I actually wrote four of these and did the research for them and so forth, and then
went around to the radio stations and found out that not any of them were interested.
So I had a wife to support, and I sat down and wrote the kind of thing that I'd been
reading all this time, first time seriously, and wrote a story called Paradox, which I
sent off to astounding and astounding Senate back.
And I sent it off to amazing and amazing Senate back, and I sent it off to Throwing
Wonder Stories, which was the third magazine that, and starting stories, were published
by the same chain.
And one day I got a letter back saying, I like your story, Paradox, and I'll pay you
$80 for it, so I thought Marvelous.
I'd really stumbled onto something that was tremendous.
And so I meanwhile had been writing another story, which was a story called Communication.
And I created it the same way, sent it off to astounding first, and I think maybe I sent
it off second after I got rejected by astounding to Throwing Wonder Stories, and the same editor,
Sam Merwin Jr. brought it, and that was the story which happened to be published first
in Starling Stories in September of 1949, where the first story I actually wrote with
Paradox was published the following month in Throwing Wonder Stories in 19th and October.
You didn't have to go through a long process of getting rejection slips, then did you?
No, as a matter of fact, sometimes when I talk to aspiring young writers and they turn
to me and they say, how many rejection slips did you get before you finally sold a story?
And I look a little sheepish because I know it's not the answer they want.
And I said, I sold the first story ever really wrote, seriously, and their faces fall, and
then I followed up immediately by saying, but of course Ray Bradbury had 75 to 100 stories
rejected before he sold one.
And look what he got to.
Yeah, okay. This next question, I'm not quite sure how to phrase it, but I've always been
fascinated by the split in your relationship to science fiction. It seems to me that you
must have at one time made a decision to be an academic and to be a writer at the same
time. I wonder if that was a hard decision or if you ever considered full time writing
or what you did.
I did, as a matter of fact, write full time for a period of a little more than three years,
a year in 1948-49. And I went back to school then and got a master's degree, but I continued
to write. And then after I'd worked for this paperback publisher, after I got my master's
degree, worked for a paperback publisher for a year and a half, I found out that I'd sold
four stories that I hadn't known about and decided to go back to full time writing. So
I did write full time from the fall of 1942 until the late summer of 1955. And really
much of the groundwork for the later books that I published and the success that I had,
I think, especially it was, was based upon that freelance period. I didn't make a lot
of money at it, very, you know, below the poverty level. But my needs were fairly simple
at that time and what it later paid off in the sense that the stories that I wrote appeared
in books and some of them even were made in the movies and all that sort of thing. And
I would have thought I was very well off indeed. But it was after 1955 or in the fall of 1955,
after my wife and I had moved back to Lawrence, Kansas, simply as a place to live, that I got
involved almost by accident with teaching at the university from which I'd gotten my
two degrees, the University of Kansas, and became involved with other aspects of the
university, edited the alumni magazine for three years, and then became director of public
relations for the university for 12 years before returning to full time teaching and
writing in 1970. But looking back upon it, I know I think right from the beginning I
had the feeling that I wanted to do criticism in the area. My first 10 stories, for instance,
were published under a pseudonym of Edwin James using, I began to use my own name with
the 11th story. But the reason that I can remember now for doing that was the fact that
I thought I would write criticism about science fiction and I wanted to save my real name
for that. But after 10 stories I decided that was foolish and I ought to use my real name
for everything. But looking back upon it, I think the academic interest was there right
from the beginning.
Okay, that's interesting. I want to ask you obviously a couple questions at least on your
criticism, but first could you give me a sort of a brief overview of the things that
you do at the University of Kansas that involve science fiction? I imagine it's probably one
of the most active university science fiction programs in the country, if not the most active.
We have a lot of things going on. I've been fortunate to have found a colleague here,
Stephen Goldman, who is interested in science fiction, although his basic academic discipline
is the medieval period. It's a strange phenomenon I think that a great many science fiction
academicians have their expertise as medievalists. I don't know what the connection is, but I
suspect that there is one. But we also, because of our interest here, I think have attracted
some graduate students who are interested in the area, some of whom have gotten degrees,
not in science fiction because we don't offer one, but in science fiction related areas.
I have one graduate student now who's doing his dissertation on my work and another one
who graduated last year who did a creative dissertation of a book of science fiction
stories. So we have had that body of graduate students who have taught science fiction classes
at the sophomore level as one of the required courses in composition and literature. I also
traditionally teach a science fiction course, an undergraduate and graduate science fiction
course each year, although my primary duties in the English department are the teaching
of fiction writing. Perhaps our most interesting science fiction offering, however, is the
three week intensive English institute on the teaching of science fiction that we offer
in the summer. We realized a number of years ago that there were a lot of people facing
these with the task, sometimes self-assumed, sometimes assigned, of teaching a science
fiction course. And they were largely unprepared because there had been no academic program
on science fiction, certainly not on the teaching of science fiction. So we set up this intensive
three week workshop to offer teachers the opportunity to attend and get a six-hour, six-credited
hour program in science fiction, in all aspects of science fiction, in just three weeks. It's
very intensive experience. We bring in several science fiction writers besides myself. This
year we're having Gordon Dixon and Theodore Sturgeon, Frederick Cole, and it has been a
most successful and satisfying experience. This summer the institute will be held from
July 5th to July 23rd.
Okay. By the way, I am a medievalist myself too. That is kind of strange, but I think
my field is medieval literature too.
Is that right?
Yeah.
Why do you think medievalists are attracted to it?
I don't know. I never thought of it until you just mentioned it.
I know half a dozen people. Tom Shippey, who is an English medievalist, who teaches now
at Leeds University. I know the editor of pocketbook science fiction, David Harkwell,
is a medievalist with a PhD in medieval literature. I think there must be a number of others.
I think my own feeling is that medieval literature perhaps requires the same kinds of world construction
of imagination and building up an entirely new world out of different concepts, much
like science fiction. At least that is the theory that I am proposing.
That is interesting. I never thought of it.
We teach a class here at Odessa College and we use the Road to Science Fiction series,
which I consider to be a very valuable and unique endeavor. It is something we needed.
I would like to ask you just a couple of questions on that. First of all, was there any sort of,
for that particular approach to science fiction, was there any kind of impetus or idea that
caused you to start that series? Maybe it would be best to give you a kind of
history of its development. When I first went back to full time teaching, I had been asked
if I would teach a science fiction course, which is different from the experience at
most universities, where there is some resistance to the notion of doing that. I accepted because
I had the feeling that there wasn't a good history of science fiction and that this course
would give me the incentive to write it. I sat down and wrote very fast and ended up
with 13 chapters representing about 13 lectures for the 14-week semester. These chapters, or
these lectures, became the 13 chapters in a book of mine, which appeared in about, I
guess, 75, after some delays. As Alternate Worlds, the illustrated history of science fiction
and it did reasonably well. There were some problems with its publication, so forth, including
the delays, but it is still remembered today in spite of being out of print as being one
of the best histories of science fiction, complimenting Brian Aldous's Billion Year
Spree, which he was doing at the same time, but his book came out a couple years earlier.
But as a one consequence of its publication, I got a call one day from an editor at New
American Library who was admiring it and asked me if I'd like to do a book for them. My
initial reaction was that I felt that we needed a good collection of essays about science
fiction. And I proposed a book of these. Rather fortunately, I think for me it was turned
down at New American Library and they said they'd rather have some stories. And I knew
also that I really felt the need for anthologies, which covered more than the brief span of
the 20s to the 60s, which most anthologies did and there really wasn't much in the 20s
or 30s, most of it, covered the period of the 40s and 50s. So I said yes and I sent them
a proposal for the first volume of the Road Science Fiction. At that time, all we knew
that there would be would be one volume, which covered the period from the earliest pre-history
of literature, not to mention science fiction, up to 1900 and the H. G. Wells Early Stories
and Novel. By the time I got finished with the manuscript, I had felt that it really,
unlike most books, came out even better than I thought it was going to. And I proposed that
we go ahead with a second and third volume. They said, let's wait and see how this does.
And eventually after it had done better than they thought, they agreed that I could go
on to volume two and three, which covered the period from 1900 to the 20th century.
And then from 1940 to 1970 or 70, actually the latest point, 76, I think. And I did those
together. But by the time I got to the third volume, I realized that I wasn't going to
be able to get in everything that I wanted and suggested we go ahead to a fourth volume,
but they said, well, let's wait and see how these do. As a consequence, however, of the
fact that these did very well, were well accepted, they finally agreed that I go ahead to the
fourth volume. And I've just completed that, sent in the manuscript. And the fourth volume
wrote science fiction is scheduled to appear in October of this year. And it will cover
the period overlapping a little bit with the volume three, the period from 1950 to 1981.
The last volume is going to be a little different from the first three, however. The first three
are on a historical basis as I've introduced. And I think that's a good point. And I think
it's indicated, and you have noted, with much of the emphasis being on the development of
science fiction and the stories generally selected for the ones which were important
in the development of science fiction or typical of a certain period or a certain style, in
the more current story, this is much more difficult to determine. You can't really say
what stories are important until much after they've been published. And you can't certainly
say which are typical until you decide what the period really stands for. So what I did
in the fourth volume was to select stories that I thought dealt with the literary uses
of science fiction. And so that the volume is primarily concerned not with questions of
generic importance, but the question of literary uses.
Okay, that was a very complete answer. In fact, you probably got a couple of my next
questions with that one. Let's see, could you just say in volume one, could you briefly
comment on, I think the idea or the concept behind that particular volume was that before
science fiction could exist that man had to discover that there was a future and there
was such a thing as progress. Could you briefly explain that?
Yes, it seems to me that the essential nature of science fiction is that it deals with change.
In fact, in order for us to recognize a story or a novel as being science fiction, we have
to identify that part of it which is different from here and now, our everyday world. And
so it deals with how people would react in changed circumstances. So up to approximately
the time of the Industrial Revolution, the very concept of change itself was alien to
human minds. For most of humanity's history, it seems to me, and of course as a medievalist,
maybe I'm venturing into your area, but it seems to me, looking back over the history
of humanity, that mostly people saw change as being only the eternal source of change.
It's not just the circle of the seasons changing from spring to summer to fall to winter and
back again, or if there was change in people's circumstances, it was usually change for the
worst. And as a kind of, that is, you know, something, the king would die and the empire
would be thrown into turmoil or there would be a war lost or won or barbarians would
come in pillaging and burning and killing and other kinds of terrible things or there
would be drought or plagues or all sorts of bad things. But so as a consequence, throughout
most of man's history that if there have been legends and myths of a golden age which man
once existed in and which, from which humanity has been expexpelled or has degenerated or
deteriorated, and it wasn't until the investor revolution and of course the scientific perceptions
that preceded it and accompanied it, and which began to create change that people saw could
be beneficial and in which they could, over which they might be able to exercise some control.
That is, it was man made change created by human desires and intelligence and it could
be controlled by humanity's exercise of intelligence. And it seems to me that science fiction was
the literary response to that recognition.
Fine, okay. I've noted that in each volume you seem to have a, you know, a unifying concept,
like for the second volume it would be the idea that man had to consider himself as a
species in science fiction. The third was that we have to have an open mind about the universe
and man's fate for science fiction to exist. Does the fourth volume have that kind of unifying
idea behind it and what would it be?
No, what it deals with and those themes really kind of happened in the first three volumes
and when you run into coincidences like that you feel like something is going right. It
was an introduction to volume one and I realized as I wrote this introduction that I was setting
down three basic requirements and that these basic requirements for the existence of science
fiction, the recognition of humanity as a species and so forth, somehow fit in with my concept
of how science fiction had developed and so from there I picked it up for volume two and
volume three but I think in this current one the genre already has been established by
the time we come to 1950 and that now the major considerations are not generic so much
as how are we going to write it, how are we going to express the ideas and what ideas
are we going to express considering the fact that we already have a genre to deal with.
How are the first three volumes sold?
Reasonably well for this kind of book, the mentor books at New American Library are
intended to be primarily academic books, they also issue them on the mass market but they
don't expect a major sale on them and all three of them at the present time or as of
six months ago, all three of them have already sold over 30,000 copies each and they will
keep them in print, sometimes expect to sell more of course, particularly with the issuance
of the fourth volume but they expect the average mentor book only sells about 20,000 so it's
already done, all of them have done 50% better than the average book.
This is sort of a general question, feel free to answer it as briefly as you'd like.
Why do you think there's a need, I think you do think there is, a need for science fiction
criticism and scholarship?
I think that a category of fiction like science fiction, I hate to continue to use the word
genre because it's not really traditionally a genre, it is a set of conventions and a
set of expectations but in this particular area which has largely been ignored, it's
by the apparatus of criticism in this country and in other parts of the world as well because
it's not been considered important enough to merit criticism, it's considered to be
a pulp literature, a popular literature and in a sense beneath criticism and as a consequence
it has developed largely under its own impetus without any kind of efforts of critical minds
to look at it and try to appraise it, say what's good and what's bad according to
some kind of standards that can be established and as well to teach the help of the media
and other critical areas of English literature to appraise it differently, to understand
that unlike other kinds of literature, science fiction has special things that it does and
has special ways that it does it and to appraise science fiction by the same kind of standards
that you apply to traditional literature, science fiction is always going to come up short,
it doesn't do the same things, it deals not with characters but with change and so it
seems to me that there needs to be two different routes or there are two desirable ends for
criticism, one is to educate the non-science fiction part of the literary world to the
special requirements of science fiction and its special accomplishments, the other is
to exercise and apply a set of standards to science fiction itself to improve the breed
so to speak.
Okay fine, I only have two more questions on this particular line that I've been following,
your book alternate worlds, I didn't have a real specific question on that, I've used
it as a research aid and found it very useful and of course I read Brian Aldous's and Donald
Walheim's and so forth, histories of science fiction, do you think there's room for any
more histories of science fiction?
Well they're still coming up and whether they're any more needed, I suspect that as
these books get dated new appraisals are necessary and indeed if a new kind of perception of
science fiction emerges there certainly needs to be a reappraisal of the history that is
either supported or refuted. I don't know that we really need more histories, I suspect
that maybe in another ten or fifteen years maybe a new history will be more needed.
Fine, okay my other question, this is one we ask all the authors that we talk to and
sort of a touchy subject with them, it has to do with the relation between science fiction
and mainstream, I've read some of your ideas on it and I can't quite make up my mind, I
think in one essay I think it was the one that appeared in Bretoners book, you said
that science fiction and the mainstream were becoming closer but that you thought that
perhaps it would be a good idea for science fiction to keep its unique qualities. Whereas
in another piece I think it was the introduction to breaking point, you said that it implied
that it was a good idea that they do come back together where they belong and that they
should blend. I wondered if you could sort of specify your feelings about that.
Well I guess maybe I do have mixed notions about it. I think that existing separate concepts
deliberately science fiction has attained certain kinds of kind of strengths created
by isolation but also certain kinds of weaknesses. But I also think that the mainstream of literature
has certain qualities and selection processes that could benefit science fiction.
I guess the ideal, and I think in a certain sense it is happening, the ideal would be
that good books ought to be published without, essentially without generic identification.
And they are being so published. I think if you look around at the significant new novels
that are really selling well, like the Dune books or like Gregory Benford's newest novel,
Timescape, they aren't really published generically. They are being published as novels which can
find their own readers. And as a consequence, the latest, I guess God Emperor of Dune sold
something like 200,000 copies in hard cover which makes it a best selling. It certainly
would not have that kind of sales as a science fiction book. And it is not being published
that way. At the same time, I would say that I would hate to see the genre itself be totally
merged into the mainstream so that it couldn't be identified because I think it has certain
kinds of strengths that might well be lost. And if every book was unable to seek a particular
kind of audience that could identify it, there would be much less science fiction written
and much less written. So I'd like to see both things happen simultaneously. I think
they are happening. It also has some drawbacks to it too currently in that if science fiction
has the capacity to sell as best sellers, then editors and publishers are going to be looking
at all books that are submitted to them, all science fiction books, to see if they have
the best seller in them. And many, I think mid-range books which at once would have been
published without question are now being rejected because they do not really have the potential
to be as rewarding as some of the others.
Okay. If you're still doing okay, I think I better move on to some of your own work.
I did have some more ideas about the criticism and so forth, but I better be selective here
because I did want to talk about your own work too. The joy makers. I guess it's hedonics.
That's how you pronounce it?
That's how I pronounce it.
If I remember, their premise was that the basic freedom is the freedom to be happy. Okay,
now obviously I read the book and I know the answer to this, but could you just briefly
tell me where the flaw is in that reasoning?
Well, my, and I really worked my way through it having gotten the idea for a basic science
of happiness from an article I read in the Psychotherapy of Britannica and sort of worked
my way through the notion that happiness, you know, could be achieved scientifically
directly rather than through things that we think might make us happy like love or fame
or money or success or whatever we think, you know, might make us happy. And essentially,
this article that I read pointed out to me something that I don't know whether I would
have thought about or not. Maybe I would have, that there are basically two ways to
be happy. You can either get what you want, which will make you happy, or you can want
what you get. And that means that you have to discipline yourself so that no matter what
happens, you're happy because you are the kind of disciplined person who doesn't let
his happiness depend upon external events. And that of course is a kind of stoicism.
And I saw this as being the two holes upon which I could rest a philosophic approach.
To the notion of happiness. Ultimately, as it worked out in the novel, it turned out
that the people who wanted happiness to get what they want, since the, what one can get
in the external world is limited by the number of people and the number of people who want
this particular thing. Ultimately, they get what they want by being fed illusions that
they get what they want. And ultimately, everybody ends up floating in amniotic cells living
on dreams of success and accomplishment fed by a machine, which I eventually worked out
to be that you're happy when you don't want anything anymore. And it occurred to me that
that is the same as death. And ultimately, the equation for that is that happiness equals
death and that life is still wanting something.
Okay, as I was nearing the end of that book and saw what you were getting at, I got the
impression that you were saying man was not meant or he was not created to be satisfied.
His nature is not such. And I wondered if you...
Yeah, well, my third dirty, my feeling about it comes in a sense from a story about Candide,
which I read many years ago that Candide was walking along a country road and saw a woman,
or I don't mean Candide, I mean Voltaire, the author of Candide. Voltaire was walking
along this country road and saw a peasant woman working in the fields, singing happily
while he was walking along, overcome with the cares of states and the problems of intellectual
difficulties. And he said to himself, wouldn't it be wonderful if I could change places with
her and she could have all of my knowledge and misery and I could have all of her ignorance
and happiness. And he responded, no. He said, I wouldn't trade that for an instant. He said,
if the choice is happiness versus knowledge, he said, I'll choose knowledge every time.
And it seems to me that people only think they want to be happy. That they really, what
they really want is knowledge, not just abstract knowledge. They want knowledge and they will
pursue knowledge even when it makes them unhappy. And I have incorporated this in a number of
books. Campus, for instance, has the same kind of theme.
I also got the impression, though maybe I was wrong here, in the work Faust. I think
that the bargain Faust makes with the devil is that if the devil can ever satisfy and
make him totally happy, then he's lost and he goes to hell. You didn't have that in
the background either?
No, I don't think so. Of course, I know the Faust legend and the various literary works
based on it, but I wasn't really thinking about it at that time. What I was really thinking
about more than anything else was the fact that it was the Voltaire concept and the feeling
that people, I guess, my own basic feeling that people only think they want to be happy.
Okay, let me just move on briefly to the Immortals. Would I be right in presuming that
to be your best known book?
Well, probably because of the television series. It may be the best known, although
certainly the listen is also very well known.
What was your reaction to the TV series?
Well, I thought it was a total disaster. And that's not uncommon, of course, but the
resemblances between the novel and the book are very slight. My book starts with the Immortal
being a drifter who comes in and sells a pint of blood and then disappears for the
rest of the novel until the very end. And the television series is all about the Immortal
and his being pursued. And eventually it turns into simply another search for the papers,
another fugitive. Somebody is being chased, but it makes no real difference why he's being
chased. He's being good, could have been, he had a fortune or a secret or a multi-spalc
in there. Anything else?
Okay, listen, David...